Phase control for single-phase motors - up to 2300 watts
--------------------------------------------------------

Control for direction-switchable 230V *direct current* motors, whose speed (rpm) can be controlled using a
10k potentiometer *or* a PWM (pulse width modulation in the low voltage range) can be controlled via uController.

Priciple of a Poti-Controlled Phase-Control of 230AC/320VDC Motor
(3D image of the entire motor control)

Phase control circuits are often used for speed control, here a PA with a downstream one
Rectifier for reversible 230V DC electric motors, which are often used in hobby machines
medium power (up to 10 amps or up to approx. 2300 watts) such as lathes and milling benches.

Since the electronic controls of 230V *DC* motors in today's hobby machines such as lathes, milling benches, etc.
often have inexpensive components that are not protected against surges or current peaks – therefore
unfortunately failures are inevitable, so I decided to use a circuit that works a little more reliable,
with electronic components and *modules* that are readily available on the market and more reliable.
All 230VDC (direct current!) carbon brush motors with up to 2300W can be controlled with this phase control.
It allows you to control the speed of the motor (0-100%) as well as the motor direction of rotation.

Safety features of this single-phase speed-control:

In addition, this circuit has essential safety circuits:
- The main module "Kemo-M240" used here contains an integrated soft start, needed to start up larger motors,
   to avoid the tripping of standard 16A household fuses
- This module also contains an automatic overload or anti-lock shutdown with electronic reset
- If the motor contains a built-in NTC thermistor (with 100kOhm), the µController can provide a possible
   Monitor engine overheating protection. When 80°C is exceeded, the µC switches off the PWM goes into an endless loop,
   and can then only be reactivated by switching off the power or by pushing the reset-button of the controller.

!!!: Protection against direction of rotation switching *while driving* is NOT provided here: Due to this, if
an "EMF short circuit" occurs, the "Kemo-M240" controller switches off very quickly and thus at least protects
the mechanics of the machine. The electronics can then only be used again after a complete restart or Power shutdown.

Disclaimer:
!!! It goes without saying that you reproduce this circuit at your own risk and responsibility!!!
Anyone who does not have sufficient knowledge of how to handle *dangerous* 230VAC currents or 325VDC(ss) voltages(!):
If you are not familiar with electrical or electronic components, you should either hire a specialist to do it for you
or stay away from it!
“Experiments” without special knowledge and appropriate protection(s) on high voltages can quickly end in death
following an electric shock! And sudden cardiac-arrest can occur even days after an electric shock! - if then
no immediate help is nearby...
In any case, a replica of this project is done expressly and explicitly *at your own risk*!

Further notes:
- Three-phase motor activations are hereby excluded due to the principle! This circuit only controls single phase Engines!
- The circuit also works with (simpler) *AC* single-phase asynchronous motors - omitting the bridge rectifier used here.
   However, a connected *AC* motor then is no longer direction-reversible.
- It is NOT suitable for capacitor motors! - "Capacitor starting motors" are often only used for simple purposes and
   built + used for on/off operation only (such as for smaller hobby drill presses) - and are not speed-regulated. But
   it depends specifically on the type of engine, some capacitor motors can still be regulated (speed-limited).
   However, any weak to poor efficiency that occurs should be taken into account (including heat losses).

Factual suggestions for improvements and changes are always welcome!

(principle sketch)

The picture shows a possible, basic structure or the basic diagram of the electronic control
DC motor, e.g. a hobby lathe, which is connected to a single-phase 230VAC alternating current network - therefore
This circuit is only designed for a maximum output of 2300 watt motors (=> 10A fuse!) - but what
should be sufficient for most machines in the hobby sector (⇒ pay attention to the motor nameplate!).

(Main Wiring Diagram)

Principle description:
The control works according to the 230VAC phase control principle (similar to a lamp dimmer), but in contrast
it may neutralize the EMF (electromotive force) of a motor and is determined by the selection of electronic components.
A higher quality module is used to control the motor, which is controlled via PWM (Pulse Width Modulation).
The micro-controller “Arduino-Nano” used here generates the PWM and (if present) it also evaluates an NTC sensor
installed in the motor, to check any possible Engine overtemperature.
The speedometer for speed display does not run - as usually - *independently* of the main control (RPM display on a LED display), 
but also sends back a "busy" signal to the µController, which therefore "knows" when the motor is running or
when it is standing still, in order to ensure active discharge of the triac snubber and the EMI or EMC-filters charged
through supplied voltages and the motor back EMF, in order to avoid an uncontrolled, jerky starting of the DC-motor
after changing direction!

The control consists of several modules “wired” one behind the other:

1. the 10AT fuse and the on/off switch with latching contactor,
2. the (mandatory) safety switches or other 230V safety microswitches on a specific machine,
3. the upstream EMC filter (= electromagnetic compatibility), here called EMI filter (to avoid E.M. interferences),
4. the actual PWM (triac) phase control (control using a potentiometer *or* pulse-width modulation),
5. in parallel the low-voltage electronics (+5V/GND) to generate the PWM for the phase control, using an "Arduino-Nano"
    module with additional software-side monitoring of eventual motor-over-temperature with external NTC-sensor,
6. the 15A/1500V bridge rectifier,
7. the “pole inverter”, also called reversing switch or direction of rotation switch,
8. a second EMI (carbon brush fire) suppression filter + a second 10AT motor fuse,
9. and at last the 325V DC (=direct current) motor.

The only part that still needs to be soldered together + programmed is the “wiring board” to connect the Low-Voltage
PWM-Signal to the main phase control module "Kemo-M240". This wiring board contains also the Arduino Nano µController 
as the heart of the circuit, some passive components (resistors + capacitors) and the JST-Connectors for Sensors
and the tachometer (rpm display) + the Discharge Circuit for both Discharge Resistors, to avoid uncontrolled
starting impulses / jerk starting of the motor switching it to reverse-direction.

The “wiring board”:
(Circuit diagram of the low-voltage circuit "wiring board" with the Arduino Nano)
(3D image of the "wiring board")

The “wiring board” with the Arduino Nano is provided as schematic and as PCB-layout in Eagle format - which can
easily be converted into other formats.

Speedometer:
(Picture)

The modified speedometer consists of a 4-digit LED display and an "Arduino Mini Pro" with 2 pieces of
10k resistors to GND. This tachometer can either be “manually wired”:
- by wire-connecting the 4-digit LED-Display to the Mini-Pro + 2x 10k resistors to GND,
   or
- soldered together on a SMD-Board with the provided layout. Both Schematic + Layout as well as the BOM
  (Bill of Materials) + Software are included.

The speedometer for speed display/control can also be purchased as a (ready-made) module - but then
the running monitoring + also the unloading unit is no longer thereby (and can then be ignored).

Anyone who is familiar with the DIY production of circuit boards can either use the Toner Direct
Method (.pdf plans for 2-sided copy in 1:1 scale) or roll it out to an external PCB layout-service.
Documents are available both as Eagle layouts and as Gerber/Excellon files (in the .zip archive) attached.
